## Definitions

Here are a list of term definitions that will help GMs as they manage their teams.

SALARY CAP vs LUXURY CAP

: The salary cap acts as a “soft cap” meaning that it can be exceeded in
certain situations (such as re-signing bird rights players or signing
players to minimum contracts). The luxury cap is not so much a cap on
anything but a threshold that once your salary crosses the team
ownership gets penalized with paying extra taxes for doing so. This
number is important because your ownership may allow you to spend over
the salary cap but might want you to stay under this luxury cap number.
Your amount under the luxury cap will also impact your ability to use
the mid-level exception.

EXCEEDING THE SALARY CAP

: As mentioned the salary cap is a “soft cap” and can be exceeded
in some situations. You can always sign players to a minimum contract.
If you have a restricted free agent who gets an offer you can exceed the
cap to match that offer. You can also exceed the cap when using the
low-level, mid-level or bird rights exceptions.

BIRD RIGHTS

: Bird Rights are acquired by players when they finish the season
on a team roster. If a player is released or changes teams via free
agency his bird rights years are reset to zero but they do not reset if
he is traded or resigns with his own team. Bird right years are
important because they determine how much you can offer your player in
free agency. This is an advantage for the team who has the player last
because while all other teams need cap space or an exception to bid on
the player the team holding his bird rights does not.

: Players with three or more bird years can receive any amount up to the
league maximum contract for their number of years of experience in the
league with 7.5% annual raises. Players with two bird years can be
signed for up to 175% of the previous season’s contract amount assuming
that does not exceed the league maximum for his experience level with
7.5% annual raises. Players with just one bird year can be offered up to
120% of their previous contract with 4.5% annual raises.

OTHER EXCEPTIONS

: You may also have the mid-level exception and low-level exceptions
available to you in free agency. Teams over the luxury cap amount or far
under the salary cap will not get these exceptions so keep that in mind
during your contract planning.

RESTRICTED FREE AGENTS

: When a player finishes his full rookie contract (four years for first
round picks, two years for second round picks) they have the ability to
become restricted free agents. This means that you tender them a
temporary contract and allow them to become a free agent. If they
receive an offer in free agency they wish to accept you will get the
chance to match that contract or lose the player with no compensation.
If they do not find an offer they like they will have to sign with your
team for one season for the temporary contract amount and then next
season will become an unrestricted free agent. Keep this in mind when
making an offer for another team’s RFA that if you’re not overpaying the
team is probably likely to match the offer. Players do not become RFAs
automatically. You have to go to your contracts page and make them a
“qualifying offer” on or before the CONTRACTS action date in the game.

CAP HOLDS AND RENOUNCING RIGHTS

: You may wonder why players who are now free agents are still
counting against your salary cap. These are cap holds and any player who
is a bird rights free agent has one that counts against your team -
otherwise teams could use up all of their cap space and then try to
resign their own bird rights free agents by going over the cap. If you
want to have salary cap space to use then you will have to renounce the
bird rights of your free agents. Do this on the CONTRACTS date in the
game as well by going to your team contracts page and choosing the
renounce option for players. This will free up the cap space but also
take away the bird rights for the player.

EXTENSIONS

: You can try to extend the contracts of your own players from your
team contracts page as the season goes along but often times you will
see that the player is asking for more money than you can offer in an
extension. This is not a bug - it is what the player wants and often
times it is more advantageous to the player to go to free agency even if
he intends to resign with your team to be able to get the most money
possible.

TWO-WAY CONTRACT

: Two way contracts essentially allow you to have
team control over two additional players who do not count against your
15 man roster limit or your salary cap. When you sign a player to a two
way contract he is placed on your development league affiliate on a two
year contract. He remains there unable to be signed by another team
until his contract runs out. You can call this player up at any time but
doing so will remove the two way contract and replace it with a regular
contract that does count against your salary.
